CIP-0141? | Web-Wallet Bridge - Plutus wallets (#798)
cardano-foundation/CIPs: CIP-xxxxx/README.md

---
CIP: ???
Title: Web-Wallet Bridge - Plutus wallets
Status: Proposed
Category: Wallets
Authors: 
  - Leo
Implementors: NA
Discussions:
Created: 2023-10-12
License: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Abstract

This document describes a CIP-30 extension allowing webpages (i.e., DApps) to interface with Cardano Plutus wallets. This interface is a work in progress, and new versions are expected to be included as the ecosystem evolves. 

## Motivation: why is this CIP necessary?

> In order to facilitate future DApp development, we will need a way for DApps to communicate with Plutus wallets, given the unique complexities of Plutus-based addresses. Special provisions need to be made to make the connector compatible with them.  

Reviewer: needs more explicit info about what "Plutus wallet" actually means.

Author: Added a section explaining Plutus wallets and a few possible implementation of them

- signatories: The list of signatories that must sign the transaction.
- redeemers: The list of redeemers that will be used in the transaction.
- datums: The list of datums that will be used in the transaction.

```ts
type ScriptRequirement = {
  collateral?: List<cbor<transaction_unspent_output>>,
  inputs?: List<cbor<transaction_unspent_output>>,
  reference_inputs?: List<cbor<transaction_unspent_output>>,
  outputs?: List<transaction_output>,
  mint?: Value,
  certificates?: List<Certificate>,
  withdrawals?: Dict<StakeCredential, Int>,
  validity_range?: ValidityRange,
  signatories?: List<KeyHash>,
  redeemers?: Dict<ScriptPurpose, Redeemer>,
  datums?: Dict<Hash<Blake2b_256, Data>, Data>
}
```

#### ValidityRange

```ts
type ValidityRange = {
  valid_before?: PosixTime,
  valid_after?: PosixTime,
}
```

#### Value
```ts
type Value = {
    amount: Coin,
    asset: String
}
```

### Aditional Error Types

#### CompletedTxError

```ts
CompletedTxErrorCode = {
	NotFound: 1,
	NotReady: 2
}
```

* NotFound - The transaction with the given id was not found.
* NotReady - The transaction with the given id is not ready yet. 

> ## Motivation: why is this CIP necessary?

Reviewer 2: Duplicate section

Reviewer 3: Not really a duplicate section but fixed in https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/798/commits/4805b23d537f3a8c3e35fdb7731ab27e53a5138a.

In order to facilitate future DApp development, we will need a way for DApps to communicate with Plutus wallets. Given the unique complexities of Plutus script-based addresses, special provisions need to be made to make the connector compatible with them.

Specifically, apps building transactions need to be able to get the following information from the wallet:

- Script descriptor
- `ScriptRequirement` list
- Collateral donor

Additionally, apps need to be able to submit a transaction to the wallet for signing in an asynchronous manner, as gathering of signatures can take a long time and each wallet provider will have its own way of handling this process.

Finally, the `signData()` endpoints will have to be disabled when using this extension since they are not compatible with Plutus-based addresses.

### V2 Additional API Endpoints

> #### `api.getScriptRequirements`: Promise<ScriptRequirement[]>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### `api.cipxxxx.getScriptRequirements`: Promise<ScriptRequirement[]>
```
endpoints should be name spaced, to follow CIP30

Errors: `APIError`

Returns a list of `ScriptRequirement` that will be used to validate any transaction sent to the wallet. Every field in the `ScriptRequirement` object is optional, and the wallet should only include the fields that are relevant to the current transaction.

For wallets with multiple spend conditions, separate entries in the list should be used to represent each spend condition. Wallet providers should implement UX to allow users to order the list of `ScriptRequirement` from most to least preferred. DApps should use the first entry in the list that is valid for the current transaction or select one based on the logic of their use-case.

> #### `api.getScript()`: Promise[<number<plutusVersion>],<CBOR<plutusScript>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### `api.getScript()`: Promise[<number<plutusVersion>>],<CBOR<plutusScript>>
```

---
CIP: ???
Title: Web-Wallet Bridge - Plutus wallets
Status: Proposed
Category: Wallets
Authors: 
  - Leo
Implementors: NA
Discussions:
Created: 2023-10-12
License: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Abstract

This document describes a CIP-30 extension allowing webpages (i.e., DApps) to interface with Cardano Plutus wallets. This interface is a work in progress, and new versions are expected to be included as the ecosystem evolves. 

## Motivation: why is this CIP necessary?

In order to facilitate future DApp development, we will need a way for DApps to communicate with Plutus wallets, given the unique complexities of Plutus-based addresses. Special provisions need to be made to make the connector compatible with them.  

Specifically, apps building transactions need to be able to get the following information from the wallet:

> - Script descriptor
> - `ScriptRequirements`
> - Change Datum
> 
> Additionally, apps need to be able to submit a transaction to the wallet for signing in an asynchronous manner, as gathering of signatures can take a long time and each wallet provider will have its own way of handling this process. 
> 
> Finally, the `signData()` endpoint will have to be disabled when using this extension since they are not compatible with Plutus-based addresses. Plutus contracts cannot sign data, only validate transactions.
> 
> ### Rationale for the required data
> 
> - Script descriptor:
>     Any transaction consuming a UTXO from a Plutus-based address must attach the corresponding script. 
> 
> - `ScriptRequirements`:
>     The `TxContext` that is required to be able to validate the transaction. It encompasses all the possible combinations of requirements for the transaction to be valid, as such it is represented by an array of `ScriptRequirement` objects.
> 
> - Change Datum:
>     The datum that will be used as the change output for the transaction. This is required for wallets based on Plutus V2 and before, as the change output must contain a datum to be valid and spendable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Script descriptor
  - Any transaction consuming a UTXO from a Plutus-based address must attach the corresponding script. 
- `ScriptRequirements`
  - The `TxContext` that is required to be able to validate the transaction. It encompasses all the possible combinations of requirements for the transaction to be valid, as such it is represented by an array of `ScriptRequirement` objects.
- Change Datum
  - The datum that will be used as the change output for the transaction. This is required for wallets based on Plutus V2 and before, as the change output must contain a datum to be valid and spendable.

Additionally, apps need to be able to submit a transaction to the wallet for signing in an asynchronous manner, as gathering of signatures can take a long time and each wallet provider will have its own way of handling this process. 

Finally, the `signData()` endpoint will have to be disabled when using this extension since they are not compatible with Plutus-based addresses. Plutus contracts cannot sign data, only validate transactions.
```
Those present at yesterday's meeting got a bit dizzy thinking there were 2 _Rationale_ document sections & flipping back & forth.  These 3 items below aren't "rationale" as we've defined it in the CIP process (comparative reasons why design decisions were taken).

I think this problem could be fixed & would produce a more readable CIP if each of these 3 items were moved up with the corresponding item above.  I'm taking a shot at correcting this & I'll commit it to confirm it's readable & feel free to make further changes afterward.

---
CIP: ???

> Title: Web-Wallet Bridge - Plutus based wallets

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Title: Web-Wallet Bridge - Plutus wallets
```

Reviewer 3: resolving: updated as suggested.

Status: Proposed
Category: Wallets
Authors: 
  - Leo
Implementors: NA
Discussions:
Created: 2023-10-12
License: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Abstract

> This document describes a CIP-30 extension allowing webpages (i.e. dApps) to interface with Cardano Plutus-wallets. This document is a work in progress and is not yet finalized. It is expected to be updated as the ecosystem evolves. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document describes a CIP-30 extension allowing webpages (i.e. dApps) to interface with Cardano Plutus wallets. This interface is a work in progress and new versions are expected to be included as the ecosystem evolves. 
```
beyond the "Plutus wallets" suggestion... the original text gives us no grounds for merging or activating this CIP.  Does this revision reflect what you state below in the Versioning section?

## Motivation: why is this CIP necessary?

> In order to facilitate future dApp development, we will need a way for dApps to communicate with plutus wallets, given the unique complexities of plutus based addresses. Special provisions need to be made to make the connector compatible with them.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to facilitate future dApp development, we will need a way for dApps to communicate with Plutus wallets, given the unique complexities of Plutus based addresses. Special provisions need to be made to make the connector compatible with them.  
```

Reviewer 3: resolving: updated as suggested.

Specifically, apps building transactions need to be able to get the following information from the wallet:

- Script descriptor
- ScriptRequirements
- Change Datum

Additionally, apps need to be able to submit a transaction to the wallet for signing in an asynchronous manner, as gathering of signatures can take a long time and each wallet provider will have its own way of handling this process. 

> Finally, the signData() endpoint will have to be disabled when using this extension since they are not compatible with plutus based addresses. plutus contracts cannot sign data, only validate transactions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, the `signData()` endpoint will have to be disabled when using this extension since they are not compatible with plutus based addresses. plutus contracts cannot sign data, only validate transactions.
```
... and throughout, whenever functions or parameters are quoted?

Reviewer 3: resolving: updated as suggested.

### Rationale for the required data

- Script descriptor:

>     Any transaction consuming a UTxO from a plutus based address must attach the corresponding script. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Any transaction consuming a UTxO from a Plutus based address must attach the corresponding script. 
```
... etc, throughout the document.

Reviewer 3: resolving: updated as suggested.

#### Value
```ts
type Value = {
    amount: Coin,
    asset: String
}
```

### Aditional Error Types

#### CompletedTxError

```ts
CompletedTxErrorCode = {
	NotFound: 1,
	NotReady: 2
}
```

* NotFound - The transaction with the given id was not found.
* NotReady - The transaction with the given id is not ready yet. 

## Motivation: why is this CIP necessary?

In order to facilitate future dApp development, we will need a way for dApps to communicate with Plutus wallets. Given the unique complexities of Plutus script-based addresses, special provisions need to be made to make the connector compatible with them.

Specifically, apps building transactions need to be able to get the following information from the wallet:

- Script descriptor
- Script Requirements list
- Collateral donator

Additionally, apps need to be able to submit a transaction to the wallet for signing in an asynchronous manner, as gathering of signatures can take a long time and each wallet provider will have its own way of handling this process.

Finally, the `signTx()` and `signData()` endpoints will have to be disabled when using this extension since they are not compatible with native-script-based addresses.

> ## Rationale for the required data

Reviewer 3: @leo42 I think I see why you've written it in this order (to keep the rationale close to the data structure it refers to) but I still think you should move it down into the usual _Rationale_ section which currently contains nothing but a reference back here.

Remember also you state that this document is a "work in progress" which means this rationale might not always apply, nor apply to future versions.  Therefore as each section grows it will help us (editors, implementors, and future version authors) to maintain the standard document organisation without forward & backward references.

Reviewer 3: resolving: moved to proper _Rationale_ section as suggested.

### Altered API endpoints 

#### api.signTx(tx: CBOR<transaction>, partialSign: bool = false): Promise<CBOR<transaction_witness_set>>

This endpoint will now optionally return an error if the smart Wallet is a multiparty schema and signatures need to be gathered from multiple parties asynchronously. 

### Removed API endpoints
When connecting to a wallet using this extension the following endpoints will be disabled:

#### `api.getCollateral(params: { amount: CBOR<Coin> }): Promise<TransactionUnspentOutput[] | null>`

Collateral will be provided as an optional field in the `ScriptRequirements` object. This will allow the wallet to provide the collateral when needed, and the dApp to know if the wallet can provide collateral or not for various validation scenarios on the same wallet.

#### `api.signData(addr: Address, payload: Bytes): Promise<DataSignature>`

Plutus contracts cannot sign data, only validate transactions. This endpoint will be disabled when connecting to a wallet using this extension.

## Rationale: how does this CIP achieve its goals?

> See justification and explanations provided with each API endpoint.

Reviewer 3: see comment to be anchored by GitHub later

---
CIP: ???
Title: Web-Wallet Bridge - Plutus wallets
Status: Proposed
Category: Wallets
Authors: 
  - Leo

> Implementors: NA

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implementors: BroClan
```

Reviewer 3: Resolved with https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/798/commits/404dc6351e8fff3ff316e4f247d6d1d166f29eb6.

> Discussions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Discussions:
  - https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/798
```

---

> CIP: ???

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CIP: 141
```
